[IMP] Add 19.3 changes to the mexican localization (#17867)
odoo/documentation: content/applications/finance/fiscal_localizations/mexico.rst

To download the PDF file locally, click the :guilabel:`Print` button.

.. tip::
   When clicking :guilabel:`Update SAT`, the :guilabel:`SAT status` field on the invoice
   confirms if the XML file is **Validated** in the |SAT|.

   On a testing environment, the message :guilabel:`Not Found` commonly appears.

.. warning::
   Invoices with a :guilabel:`Country` different from Mexico or missing the :guilabel:`Zip` field in
   the customer form are classified as :guilabel:`CFDI to public` and addressed to a generic
   customer. The :guilabel:`CFDI to public` checkbox stays active on the invoice form until valid
   partner information is provided. Once the contact information for a national customer is
   complete, the checkbox is automatically deactivated.

.. _l10n/mx/invoices/cash-rounding:

Cash rounding
*************

In the Mexican localization, :doc:`cash rounding
<../../finance/accounting/customer_invoices/cash_rounding>` is supported using the

> :guilabel:`Add a rounding line` method. This adds a rounding line that changes the paid amount but 

Reviewer: Seems like the whitespace at the end of the line caused an issue with the documentation_guidelines check.
```suggestion
:guilabel:`Add a rounding line` method. This adds a rounding line that changes the paid amount, but
```

> amount but does not change the amount in the |CFDI|.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<../../finance/accounting/customer_invoices/cash_rounding>` is supported using the
:guilabel:`Add a rounding line` method. This adds a rounding line that changes the paid amount but 
does not change the amount in the |CFDI|.
```

**payment complement** XML file to the government automatically and display it in the |CFDI| tab in
both the invoice and the payment.

Similar to an invoice or credit note, the PDF and XML can be sent to the final customer. To do so,
click the :icon:`fa-cog` :guilabel:`(gear)` icon to open the actions drop-down menu and select
:guilabel:`Send receipt by email` from the payment view.

Regardless of whether the payment was created with or without reconciliation, it is possible to
download the payment PDF from the :guilabel:`CFDI` tab on the invoice by clicking the

> :guilabel:`Print` button.

Reviewer: To be more straightforward.
```suggestion
To download the payment PDF from the :guilabel:`CFDI` tab on the invoice, regardless of whether the
payment was created with or without reconciliation, click :guilabel:`Print`.
```

.. image:: mexico/mx-print-payment.png
   :alt: Example of the print button on the CFDI tab.

.. _l10n/mx/payment-cancellations:

Payment cancellations
*********************

To cancel :ref:`payment complements <l10n/mx/payment-flow>`, go to the :guilabel:`CFDI` tab of the
related invoice and click :guilabel:`Cancel` on the line of the payment complement.

> Like with invoices, go to the payment and click :guilabel:`Update SAT` in order to change the

Reviewer: I cannot test this part on a runbot because I can't connect to sign CFDI document, but it may be useful for the user to detail this part (Like with invoices, go to the payment) or add a reference, if possible, to avoid duplicating info.
```suggestion
Like with invoices, go to the payment and click :guilabel:`Update SAT` to change the
```

:guilabel:`SAT Status` and :guilabel:`Status` to :guilabel:`Cancelled`.

.. note::
   When substituting a payment complement, unreconcile the current payment. On the new payment, add a
   relation to the original document by adding `04|` plus the fiscal folio in the
   :guilabel:`CFDI Origin` field. If the new payment is signed after the substituted document is

>    linked, the older payment is cancelled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   When substituting a payment complement, unreconcile the current payment. Then, to link the new
   payment to the original document, add `04|` followed by the fiscal folio in the :guilabel:`CFDI
   Origin` field. If the new payment is signed after the substituted document is linked, the older
   payment is cancelled.
```

   :guilabel:`Create Replacement Invoice` to create a new draft invoice. This new draft invoice
   replaces the previous invoice, along with the related |CFDI|.
#. :guilabel:`Confirm` the draft and :guilabel:`Send` the invoice.

> #. The substituted invoice requests the cancellation automatically when the new one is signed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. The substituted invoice automatically cancels the original invoice once the new one is signed.
```

CFDI relations
**************

To relate the current document to previously signed CFDIs, fill in the :guilabel:`CFDI Origin` field

> on the invoice and indicate the relation. There are seven possible values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on the invoice and specify the relation using one of the seven available values:
```

XML reader
**********

In certain occasions, such as when creating invoices in another software or in the |SAT| directly,
it is possible to upload the invoices in Odoo. The XML Reader can retrieve the data from an XML
file. To do this, navigate to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Customers --> Invoices` and, in the
list view, click the :guilabel:`Upload` button to select any number of XML files. Draft invoices are
automatically created. This can also work by dragging the files from a local storage and dropping

> them in the view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On certain occasions, such as when creating invoices in another software or in the |SAT| directly,
it is possible to upload invoices to Odoo. The XML Reader can retrieve the data from an XML file.
To do this, navigate to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Customers --> Invoices` and, in the list
view, click :guilabel:`Upload` to select any number of XML files. Draft invoices are automatically
created. This can also work by dragging files from a local storage and dropping them in the view.
```

   Depending on where the invoice was created, XML files could have different values from the total
   calculated in Odoo. **Always** double-check any document uploaded this way.

:guilabel:`Customer Invoices` created this way can create **payment complements** and can be
canceled at any time. If the :guilabel:`Print` button is used, the PDF document includes all the

> corresponding information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
canceled at any time. If the :guilabel:`Print` option is used, the PDF document includes all the
corresponding information.
```

   depending on the fiscal regime. Always contact an accountant before sending any documents to
   the government.

.. _l10n_mx/chart-of-accounts:

Chart of accounts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :doc:`chart of accounts <../accounting/get_started/chart_of_accounts>` in Mexico follows a
specific pattern based on the |SAT| documentation `Código agrupador de cuentas
<http://omawww.sat.gob.mx/fichas_tematicas/buzon_tributario/Documents/codigo_agrupador.pdf>`_.

It is possible to create any account, as long as it respects |SAT|'s encoding group: the pattern is
`NNN.XX.YY`, `NNN.XX.YYY` or `NNN.XX.YYY.ZZ`.

.. example::
   Some examples are `102.01.99`, `401.01.001` or `401.01.001.16`.

When a new account is created in :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Chart of
Accounts`, the structure is validated.

Once all accounts are created, make sure the correct :guilabel:`Tags` are added as these mark the
nature of the account.

Due to the account hierarchy on :ref:`parent accounts <accounting/account-groups>`, set the
appropriate :guilabel:`Parent Account` on each account to create a hierarchy for reports. Accounts

> without a parent are level 1 accounts; accounts below them are level 2, and so on.

Reviewer: The <accounting/account_groups> anchor is not (yet) available on the Chart of accounts documentation page. You can add it yourself, but use instead <chart-of-account/account-groups> to match the other ones on the page (even if they will need to be renamed <accounting/chart-of-account/account-groups> when we review the page).

```suggestion
Due to the account hierarchy on parent accounts, set the appropriate :guilabel:`Parent Account` on
each account to create a hierarchy for reports. Accounts without a parent are level 1 accounts;
accounts below them are level 2, and so on.
```

.. note::
   - Active accounts must be longer than five digits, or they trigger errors in the report. By
     default, Odoo marks the accounts in yellow if the numbering could cause issues later on.
   - If an account is shorter than five characters, mark it as inactive so validations do not apply

>      to that account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     default, Odoo marks accounts in yellow if the numbering could cause issues later on.
   - If an account is shorter than five characters, mark it as inactive so validations do not apply
     to it.
```

Trial balance
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The trial balance reports the initial balance, credits, and total balances of the accounts, provided
that their :ref:`numbering <l10n_mx/chart-of-accounts>` is correct.

To generate an XML file of the trial balance, go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Reporting -->
Trial Balance` and select the date. Click the :icon:`fa-cog` :guilabel:`(gear)` icon and select
:guilabel:`SAT (XML)`. Then, select the appropriate :guilabel:`Submit Type` from the

> :guilabel`Export SAT` window, depending on whether the trial balance is :guilabel:`Normal` or

Reviewer: sorry, my bad!
```suggestion
:guilabel:`Export SAT` window, depending on whether the trial balance is :guilabel:`Normal` or
```

Trial balance
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The trial balance reports the initial balance, credit, and total balance of the accounts, provided

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The trial balance reports the initial balance, credits, and total balances of the accounts, provided
```

that their :ref:`numbering <l10n_mx/chart-of-accounts>` is correct.

To generate an XML file of the trial balance, go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Reporting -->
Trial Balance`, select the date, and click the :icon:`fa-cog` :guilabel:`(action menu)`. Then,
select :guilabel:`SAT (XML)` and select the appropriate :guilabel:`Submit Type` from the wizard,

> depending on whether the trial balance is `Normal` or `Supplementary`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trial Balance` and select the date. Click the :icon:`fa-cog` :guilabel:`(gear)` icon and select
:guilabel:`SAT (XML)`. Then, select the appropriate :guilabel:`Submit Type` from the
:guilabel`Export SAT` window, depending on whether the trial balance is :guilabel:`Normal` or
:guilabel:`Supplementary`.
```

The DIOT (Declaración Informativa de Operaciones con Terceros / *Informative Declaration of
Operations with Third Parties*) is an additional obligation with the |SAT|, where the current status
of creditable and non-creditable payments, withholdings, import taxes, and refunds of VAT from the
vendor bills are provided to the |SAT|.

.. note::

>    Since July 2025, the new 2025 version of the report is available.

Reviewer: I don't think this note is still needed as 19.3 is 2026.

Author: You are right.

Return`. Select the desired month, click :icon:`fa-cog` :guilabel:`(action menu)`, and select
:guilabel:`DIOT (TXT)`.

> In case new taxes are created on the database, there are two types of tags. Tags containing **tax**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case new taxes are created in the database, there are two types of tags. Tags containing **tax**
```

   Selecting :guilabel:`87 - Global Operations` will cause the final TXT file to merge all vendors
   that are part of the global operations under one generic VAT: *XAXX010101000*.

.. _l10n/mx/accounting-reports:

Accounting reports
------------------

> Two Mexican-specific reports are the :ref:`Balance Sheet <l10n/mx/balance-sheet>` and the 

Reviewer: Same comment about the whitespace and the documentation_guidelines check issue.
```suggestion
Two Mexican-specific reports are the :ref:`Balance Sheet <l10n/mx/balance-sheet>` and the
```

   Selecting :guilabel:`87 - Global Operations` will cause the final TXT file to merge all vendors
   that are part of the global operations under one generic VAT: *XAXX010101000*.

.. _l10n/mx/accounting-reports:

Accounting reports
------------------

> There are two reports specific to the Mexican localization: Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two Mexican-specific reports are the :ref:`Balance Sheet <l10n/mx/balance-sheet>` and the 
:ref:`Profit and Loss <l10n/mx/profit-loss>`.
```

> Balance Sheet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _l10n/mx/balance-sheet:

Balance Sheet
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The report is based on NIF B-6 and is divided into assets, liabilities, and equity, which reflect
the current financial state of the company.

> Profit and Loss

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _l10n/mx/profit-loss:

Profit and Loss
```

#. Set the :guilabel:`Print` field to :guilabel:`QR code`, :guilabel:`URL`, or :guilabel:`QR code +
   URL`.

Customers who scan this QR code or follow the URL access a menu where they can add their fiscal
information, including the *Usage* and *Fiscal Regime*, once they enter the five-digit code provided

> on the receipt.

Reviewer: If Usage and Fiscal Regime are fields, :guilabel: should be used.
```suggestion
information, including :guilabel: Usage` and :guilabel:`Fiscal Regime`, once they enter the 
five-digit code provided on the receipt.
```

Author: They are fields. I'll add the guilabel, but the statement is now false. I'll rephrase it.

   determined by the address set on the POS invoice journal, so when attempting to invoice two
   addresses a warning will come up to warn the user of the error.

.. seealso::
   For cash rounding consider the configuration in the :ref:`Cash rounding

>    <l10n/mx/invoices/cash-rounding>` section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For cash rounding, consider the configuration in the :ref:`Cash rounding
   <l10n/mx/invoices/cash-rounding>` section.
```

Finally, enter the :guilabel:`Delivery Date` and click :guilabel:`Generate Delivery Guide`.

.. note::
   By default, the :guilabel:`Scheduled Date` is filled and represents the time at which the

>    shipment leaves the warehouse. The :guilabel:`Delivery Date` is the time that the shipment is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   shipment leaves the warehouse. The :guilabel:`Delivery Date` is the time when the shipment is
```
